There are a couple of stories that often think about and often tell this time a year.
And one of those comes back to Alice in the Wonderland, where we find this striking dialogue as a fork is reached in the road.
Alice said, and I quote, would you please tell me which way all to go from here?
Famously, the Cheshire cat responded,
That depends a good deal on where you want to get to.
Alice responded, I don't much care where to which the cat responded, then it doesn't much matter which way you go.
And Alice said, so long as I get somewhere, the response, oh, you're sure to do that if only you walk long enough.
I'm reminded of that story often because I experienced so many people who really don't know where they're going.
Isn't it so easy just to get in a rut and a routine of fumbling through life, getting caught up in the tyranny of the urgent, whatever the next thing is that occupies your mind, the next home improvement, the next vacation, the next
family tension, the next workday, the next whatever he is.
And I believe so many people live without a sense of true direction and understanding of how short this life is and how important and clear the mission is that God has given us.
And so often so many just go through the motions.
live through vanity fair, as John Bunyan said, being pulled by pleasures on the left hand and the right, just getting in the lazy river at the water park and just floating with the culture wherever it goes, or maybe having tunnel vision and getting fixed on one particular financial goal or hobby or material desire or whatever it is.
I want to ask you, what is the aim?
What is the trajectory of your life?
If your life continues in the way that you are currently living it, what is the natural outcome of that lifestyle, of the way that you spend your time and your money, of the things that occupy your heart, of the things that you give yourself on a daily basis?
What is the aim and the trajectory that that arrow is flying at and will hit if you continue the way that you're living?
I want us to step back from the verse by verse exposition that we do, and we're fully committed to every Sunday and every Wednesday of the year for hours every week.
And I want us to think about what I've entitled, the DNA and direction of RBC, new mercies for a new year.
Last week, we began to look at our church covenant and the plethora of scriptures
that are referred to as we put them all together to understand the direction that God has given to us and what we have covenanted toward and as as a local church.
Our church covenant begins with these words which we've already looked at in part one of this sermon last week.
We the members of Reformation Baptist Church hereby affirm this covenant with one another by God's grace for our good and for God's glory.
Having been brought as we believe by the spirit of God and divine grace,
to repent and believe in the Lord Jesus Christ as the Lord savior and supreme treasure of our lives.
And upon the profession of our faith, having been baptized in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, we do in the presence of God in this assembly, solemnly and joyfully covenant with one another as one body in Christ to glorify God by worshiping together and making disciples.
God has covenanted within the Godhead Father, Son, and Holy Spirit to save a people for Himself for His own glory.
And we see covenants throughout the Bible.
We see covenants throughout church history.
We see covenants everywhere.
We see covenants in marriage where there is a binding agreement.
And in the most biblical of covenants, we see that they are bound and sealed with blood.
And so Christ has covenantally bound us to Himself, and now we are bound to one another as the body of Christ.
And God has given us a mission, and we have been ever so clear as we believe the Bible teaches about that mission.
Now you may not believe that mission, and you may not be on board with that mission, but one thing is certain we believe this mission.
And Lord willing, we will seal this mission with our own blood.
and Lord willing by God's grace, may God keep us faithful.
We saw last week in our church covenant that we are resolving, first of all, as we consider the larger purposes of our life and the direction of our families in church.
Number one, to resolve to love Christ supremely.
Using that language from Jonathan Edwards, the covenant that we have bound ourselves to says, together we resolve to love Christ above all.
to see God's kingdom through regular devotion to Scripture and prayer and to actively fight against our sin.
By God's grace, completely dependent upon the power of the Holy Spirit, we are committing ourselves first and foremost.
It can't be assumed it has to be said to love Jesus Christ with every fiber of our being.
The entirety of our lives
all of our affections, all of our attention, and every ounce of our allegiance, we are committing by God's grace to love Jesus Christ with all that we have, for all that He is, for all of our lives.
And I am here to tell you this morning, there is never in all of eternity been a single person that devoted the entirety of their love and life to Jesus Christ who regretted it.
There has been a lot of things that people have regretted on their deathbed and things that they occupied themselves and loving Jesus Christ has never made the list.
No one ever regretted seeking God's kingdom, desiring his rule to be manifested in our lives in more clear and clear ways, warning his kingdom to come, warning his rule to be loved,
wanting to order our hearts, our homes, our church, wanting to see everything around us submitted to the rule of Jesus Christ.
Do you know why we sing lead on O King eternal?
Because He is the King and He is good.
And we love His Lordship and we would have it no other way.
Through laughter, interteres and through all of the mundane moments that make up all of life.
Everything we do, we want to direct it to devotion to Him.
This covenant says that we do this by devoting ourselves to Scripture and to prayer, giving ourselves to knowing the Bible, reading the Bible, knowing God through the Bible.
practicing family worship, reading the scriptures every single day, having the scriptures publicly read in our churches and loving it so.
Not wanting a single word to fall to the ground, but our ear is attuned to our shepherd and we hear every word he says with the intention to obey it.
Through prayer, we wanna know him, we wanna commune with him, we wanna seek his face and to actively fight against our sin.
Sin makes us angry and the sin that makes us the angriest is the sin that we live with every single day that lives in our own heart.
Listen, as I said last week, none of us have mastered this and not a single one of us has come even close.
We're not saying that we've got all of this right and straight.
We're saying this is the aim in the direction.
We want to put all of our sin to death and we won't Jesus Christ to reign in our lives.
Secondly, we saw that we are committed to come together regularly.
We read in Hebrews chapter 10 that we're to come together regularly to worship the Lord and in our covenant by the Holy Spirit, we are striving for the unity of this church and we are pursuing knowledge.
We are pursuing holiness.
We are pursuing love and peace.
We're for taking a baptism in the Lord's Supper.
And we are looking to the rule and return of Christ.
We're protecting the unity of God's house so that we can be one together, charging hell in the power of God.
I want to pick up this morning with number three, as we continue to look at the resolutions covenantally set before us.
A term with me in your Bible, St. Galatians chapter six, another of many passages that I would like for us to see.
We resolve to care for one another graciously.
Our covenant says, together we resolve to watch over one another and brotherly love, to remember one another in prayer, to participate in one another's joys, and bear one another's burdens.
We will cultivate Christian compassion and be slow to take offense.
We repeat this so often, you ought to be saying it with me.
We can say this in our sleep.
always being ready for reconciliation.
We will humbly and graciously confront and receive correction from one another through biblical church discipline and restoration.
We will edify one another with our speech and encourage one another in our example.
What this means is that we have a responsibility to watch over one another's souls.
As a local church, we have been given authority
and responsibility, just like every our organization, just like a family unit is.
And we're responsible to cure for and watch over one another.
First Timothy five instructs us this way, treat older men as fathers, older women as mothers.
And listen, I'll let you decide who the older women are.
I do not plan to sort all of that out right now.
And the younger as brothers and sisters in all purity, Titus chapter two says, older men, listen to me, should be sober minded, dignified, self-control, sound and faith love instead fastness.
Older women, older women are not to be slanderers or slaves to much wine, but you are to teach what is good.
Teach the younger women to love and submit to and honor their husbands.
The Bible says to be self-control, pure,
managing the home.
Young men are to be self-controlled.
You know, if you weren't mistaken and you put together all of the passages that we have in the Bible about the church and a healthy functioning of the church, you would almost think that it was a family until you realize that the predominant metaphor of the church is a family.
with older men and older women and younger men and younger women and brothers and sisters in Christ, all unified, all bound covenantally together as one.
As I mentioned last week, that means that you're gonna fuss with one another.
You ever have spats with your brothers and sisters, your family?
Anybody got a crazy uncle?
Any anybody got someone that they would rather not invite to Christmas?
You're laughing.
What are the odds that you are that person?
We're a family and we're a covenantal family.
We are the Bible says the household of God.
So we should live like it and we should look like it.
We should help one another in our responsibilities.
We should pray for one another.
First Corinthians 12 says that when one part of the body suffers, the whole body suffers.
And when one part rejoices, the whole body rejoices.
You know, it has been remarkable and overwhelming to watch our church family love my own family through the season that we're in.
And on top of that, the Silva family with Anita's knee replacement, and there's been gonna, there's so many others.
I'm like, how in the world are they doing all of this?
And I find out about another need and another need and another need.
Ladies and gentlemen, this is not just a preaching point.
although it is.
This is a covenantal family.
We don't rely on the government to take care of us.
We fulfill the biblical responsibilities of Scripture and we love one another.
Listen, our family has been talking about how we have family that we have known our entire life.
Not a single call since my father-in-law's death.
didn't show up to the funeral, don't even seem to care.
And my mother-in-law said it has been so amazing to see our church family step in and honestly people that I don't even really know personally that well, love me like they have known me my entire life.
What a beautiful expression of the body of Christ.
And I'm very thankful.
Look with me in Galatians chapter six, if any,
One is called in any transgression.
You who are spiritual, or you who mind the things of the Spirit, you who are pursuing the things of the Spirit of God, should restore him in a spirit of gentleness.
Keep watch on yourself, lest you too be tempted.
So be careful, bear one another's burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.
For if anyone thinks he is something, when he is nothing, he deceives himself.
You mean nothing?
And I'm nothing.
There's no need for jockeying for position and trying to figure out who's going to get to speak and whose name gets called and whose name doesn't and who's honored and who's not, we're all nothing.
We're all nothing.
And let us not, verse nine says, grow weary of doing good.
Do you ever grow weary of doing good?
You just don't see the effects of your labors and you wonder if it's coming to anything.
For in due season, we will read if we do not what?
Talk to me if we do not what?
Am I just gonna do this by myself?
If we do not what?
If we don't give up.
So then as we have opportunity,
Let us do good to everyone.
And especially, who does he call out?
Those who are of the household of God.
We're to be slow in taking personal offense.
We're to be eager and being reconciled to one another.
And we're to build one another up with our words.
We're to encourage one another with our lives.
We're not to keep a record of wrongs.
We're to crucify the self.
And there's no greater institution than my family and our church that I would rather give the one and only life that I have.
This is the only institution that Jesus Christ shed his blood for.
And it will outlast eternity.
Number four, as we continue to move, I want you to see fourthly, we are to resolve to serve together faithfully.
to serve together faithfully, turn with me in your Bibles to Ephesians chapter four.
Ephesians chapter four.
I feel like a museum curator, there are only so many treasures that I have time to put before you in so many pivotal passages that we have to be reminded of.
The covenant says, we resolve to pray for and submit to the leadership, which has been entrusted by God to shepherd this body by exemplifying godliness and equipping the saints for the work of the ministry.
The idea of authority in our day has become a very icky thing.
We don't like the idea of authority.
We want to throw off all authority.
How many of you are older than 16 years old and you remember once being 16 years old?
But you know the number one aim in many 16 year olds life, hopefully this isn't the case with children in our church, I can't wait to get out of my parents' house so I don't have to be under authority one day.
And then you realize that it doesn't matter where you live, you will always be under authority.
Listen to me children, you don't like someone telling you what to do
getting used to it, there will always be someone telling you what to do, whether you like it or not.
And just as Brian Ritt from Matthew 28, Jesus said, all authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me, Jesus said, I own all of it, not just in the church,
not just among the religious things, everything in all creation belongs to me and I am Lord over it.
And we take our marching orders from him and we honor the authority structures that he has put in our life.
Children, he has put parents in your life and he has charged you to honor and obey those imperfect parents as imperfect as they are one day you'll understand when you're a parent.
And God has charged us with leadership in the church as imperfect as it is, a structure.
God has given us a structure in the civil government.
The Bible teaches that pastors are to shepherd the flaw as those who will give an account before God for the souls under their care, to minister the word, to pray, to lead the church, to exemplify faith and repentance.
God help us.
in a life of godliness.
And that's a very, very sobering charge, a very sobering charge.
There's a young man many years ago.
He began to be a little downcast that his church wasn't as large as he wanted it to be.
And it wasn't as big as the church down the road.
And this young man downcast,
wondering why God had not given him a bigger church and a bigger platform.
Begin to talk to an older minister and lament the fact that his church wasn't bigger than it was.
And the older minister looked at the younger minister and he said, son, your church will have been plenty big enough when you stand before God and individually give an account of all the souls under your care.
You will have thought that it was plenty big enough.
for you to be responsible for.
May God continue to grow and build.
But friends, we are not trying to build a seeker sensitive movement and figure out how many butts we can get in the pew.
We really see God building something here.
We really wanna see God do something here.
And I mean this because I've been in larger churches and I've been down smaller churches and things in between.
I've experienced it and I mean it.
Honest before God, I would rather have 10 rowing in the same direction, fill with the Spirit of God loving His Word than 10,000 otherwise.
To their pastors, 19th century Baptist ministers were expected to submit to their leadership, honor their office and work, defend them appropriately from accusation and refrain from exposing their weaknesses, pray for them, follow their example,
support their ministry, unite under their leadership, care for them in trials, attend to meetings they call, provide generous support for their families.
It was an abomination Benjamin Keats said to insinuate into the minds of other members some evil against their pastor.
Listen, you love me and my family better than we would ever deserve.
And you take care of us.
I'm very thankful for that.
There are also men that God is raising up within our church.
that he has already over the last few years that are being faithful in leadership, taking initiative that are respected and trusted in various ways and capacities.
You know the kind of man I look to?
I look to the man who don't care about the title and they don't want the recognition.
A man who is eager to be in front of people and wants the title and recognition is no man for leadership.
But the man who does the word
Regardless of who gets the credit, that's a man worth following.
And that's what God's been doing in our church.
And in their various roles and vocations, God has been doing it with women.
And I'm just so thankful.
Ephesians 4, 12, the purpose is to equip the saints for the work of the ministry for building up the body of Christ until we all attain to the unity of the faith
and of the knowledge of the Son of God.
Here's the goal, ladies and gentlemen, to mature manhood, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.
Here's the bull's eye, ladies and gentlemen, until we all attain to the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to mature manhood, there it is again, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ so that we may no longer be children, verse 14 says,
Tossed to and fro by the waves and carried about by every wind of doctrine, by human cunning, by craftiness and deceitful schemes.
You know what children are like?
They love fads.
They fall for every fad.
Whatever the latest thing going around is, they've got to see it, they've got to have it.
And they fall for whatever the latest trick is, they're tossed, they'll believe anything naturally, they're naive.
And what he's saying is that we need to grow up in every way, just as a child, little by little, increases in his maturity, puts his selfishness to death.
He's anchored in truth.
And he's not tossed by every fad that comes and goes, listen, I don't, I could care less about what the latest fad is.
I don't care if what we're doing is in style or not.
We're going to keep doing what we believe the Bible says.
when it's popular and when it's not popular.
Rather speaking the truth in love, RBC, we are to grow up in every way and to him who is the head into Christ, from whom the whole body joined and held together by every joint with which it is equipped.
When each part is working properly, listen, each person has a part
You're on the bus, now we gotta get you in the right seat.
There is no room for you to sit.
You were not safe to sit, you were safe to serve.
And when God saved you and put you on the bus of regeneration, He gave you a job and a mission.
And when you don't do your job, it puts more work on everyone else.
And when you do, there is no pleasure like feeling the purposes of God unfolding in your life.
I am doing what God created me to do.
And I feel this pleasure when I do it.
Each part has a role working together within the body of Christ, makes the body grow so that it builds itself up in love.
And that's what we do.
I've given the last 20 to 25 years of my life in vocational ministry.
It's not just a job.
It's what my family does.
I've given my whole family, our whole family is in this thing.
You never clock out from this.
I wrote a dissertation on healthy church life.
I've given the last 20 to 25 years of my life trying to see God do a work of health.
And I'll be honest with you, it is only in the last few years that I feel like I've actually experienced it.
Our life has been filled with turmoil in church.
You ever have a bad experience in church and you're like, I don't ever want to go back again?
Huh, been there, been there.
And to watch what God has been building and doing over the last few years is uncharted territory.
Number five, number five, we resolve to witness together diligently
Together we resolve the covenant says to seek the salvation of our family and neighbors.
We will maintain family worship and train our children and those under our care according to the Christian faith.
It means that we wanna see the whole world bow the knee to King Jesus and love him for all of his worth.
We start with our neighbors, we start with our own children.
Listen to me, don't talk to me about sending children to Africa if your own children hate God.
We read the Bible.
We pray.
We invest the glories of Christ in them.
We are honest.
We repent before them.
We are genuine.
We want to give them a thoroughly Christian education, a full or worldview.
We want the love of Christ to be on display before their eyes every single day.
And every time we fail and every time we sin, we want to model repentance that mommy and daddy are sinners and need of the same grace that you need.
We really believe this.
We really wanna live this stuff out and we wanna see our children love Jesus Christ.
Only He can do that.
You can do that.
I can do that.
Only God can do that.
We wanna see our neighbors love Jesus Christ.
We wanna see all the nations ordered around His rule and loving His name, starting with our own families.
Did you know that among the Puritans,
for a very long period of church history.
They would actually excommunicate men in the church who persistently refused to practice family worship.
Buddy Harris, would you call them up in front of the church?
Buddy, would you share with us why it is that you just will not practice family worship at home?
Buddy?
We are going to have to excommunicate you.
Can you imagine that?
Now, I'm not advocating that we go back to the practice.
I'm simply highlighting that you can't export something that doesn't even operate in your own home.
May the light that shines the farther is shown the brightest at home.
Deuteronomy 6 says that the Lord your God is one.
and you should start by training your own children and then let that cup overflow to your neighbors, your work associates, your extended family, our community, Elmore County, Peru, where our missionaries are laboring, pushing back darkness for claiming light, let it not stop, let it continue to the end of the world as it overflows.
It's the great commission.
Husbands intentionally and faithfully leading their wives, wives gladly submitting to and serving their husbands, singles, living faithfully and single-minded to the Lord, children honoring and obeying their parents.
And God using this as a witness of his glory.
Number six.
Number six, we resolve to walk together righteously.
The covenant says we resolve to walk wisely in the world.
to be faithful in our engagements in Christ's exalting in our lifestyles, to avoid all gossiping and to abstain from all practices which bring unwarranted harm to the body or one's faith.
We will contribute cheerfully and sacrificially to the support of the church, aid of those in need and spread of the gospel through all nations.
Romans 1 says that the righteous shall live by faith.
And this should
display itself through the way that we live our lives.
We are walking through this world like a soldier walks through a minefield, circumspectly the older translations say seeking to be faithful, putting to death the slander and gossip of our tongue, taking care of the physical bodies that God has given us and created us with, and giving of our material resources for the extension of the mission.
And finally in enclosing the church covenant says, if we move from this place, we will as soon as possible unite with another biblical local church of like faith and practice where we can carry out the spirit of this covenant and truths of God's word.
No one just disappears.
There are no soldiers that are just MIA.
If God transitions you from here, it's to another place.
where you can serve faithfully.
And may the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with us all.
We commit our lives to serve in Christ through His church.
And it doesn't stay here.
This is not some pietistic bubble.
It has tangible effects in our lives that we want to see as kingdom come and every way that He will until He returns.
The Valley of Vision, a collection of Puritan prayers
as one Puritan reciting these words to the Lord in the close of the year.
That goodness has been with me during another year, leading me through a twisting wilderness in retreat, helping me to advance when beaten back, making sure headway.
Another writes, I launched my bark on the unknown waters of this new year with the O Father as my harbor, the O Son as my helm, the Holy Spirit filling my sails.
They understand what we need to remember.
We don't know what the coming year will bring, do we?
We don't know what the next five minutes will bring, but we do know that all of our lives are firmly planted in the hands of a good and sovereign God.
And he gives us the grace that we need for every day.
We know that spiritual warfare will never be at bay.
You set your sight on the very fundamental and simple things that we're looking at today in all of hell.
And one way or another will break loose against your life.
Satan really does come to steal, kill and destroy.
And so we suit up in the full armor of God.
J.C. Rawl put it this way, a zealous man in religion is preeminently a man of one thing.
He only sees one thing.
He cares for one thing.
He lives for one thing.
He has swallowed up in one thing, and that one thing is to please God, to please God.
Is that the center of your life?
Is that the defining factor of your life to please God?
I want to do something I almost rarely ever do.
I want to, I want to have a bit of a fireside chat together as we think about our church family and where we've been and where we're going.
Lamentations chapter three says,
His mercies never come to an end.
They are new every morning.
Great is your faithfulness.
I told you there are two stories I normally tell this time of year and I've told one and I want to tell the other.
One thing I do quite often and have done more times than I can count is premarital counseling.
And in the midst of premarital counseling, I always look the couple in the eye
And I look to the man and I say, young man, I don't know if you understand what's happening here, but in taking her to be your wife, inevitably what's happening is she is agreeing to get in the car and sit beside you.
And she is entrusting the entirety of the direction of this vehicle in your hands.
And this decision that you make
will not just affect the next five minutes, it will affect you for the rest of your life.
It will affect your children and your grandchildren unless God intervenes and does otherwise.
And every single time I've done this so many times, I look at the man and I said, do you understand the responsibility that's being put before you?
Yes, sir, yes, sir.
And I say it's only fair to ask.
She deserves to know where are you taking her?
Where are you taking her?
Not every time, but I'm telling you most every time.
I hear the biggest word salad of my entire life.
Kamala Harris couldn't stand a chance with the word salad that I'll often hear after that comment.
We need to think about where we're going.
And if we're gonna think about where we're going in such a way
that we don't waste our lives, the one and only life that we have.
I think that we first need to realize where we come from.
As a church, we have three core purposes that I wanna remind you of as our DNA.
And the first core purpose is the worship of God.
We exist for His glory.
We do not exist to entertain visitors.
We do not exist as a humanitarian aid group.
We do not exist
of for any of those things, most fundamentally we exist for the worship of God because we belong to Him.
Secondly, we exist for the discipleship of one another, especially those of the household of faith to help one another to grow and strengthen in Christ and to know and live for Him.
And the overflow and extension of that thirdly is that we exist for gospel witness to the world, to build witness of His glory to everyone around us to the ends of the earth.
The key pillars that I put forth after our last church shakeup five or six years ago, seven years ago, whatever it is, are these.
We have a commitment to the ordinary means of grace.
We believe this scripture, prayer, and the ordinances are enough.
You're not gonna find me in a clown suit and you're not gonna see a fog machine.
Our services,
For those who just pretend to love God are probably gonna be boring because there is no flash and no fanfare.
We truly believe in the power of prayer and scripture and the ordinances and the seeker sensitive churches can have all of the other stuff.
Secondly, family worship and corporate worship.
Two pillars, we give ourselves to worship in our families and that includes you if you're single.
with other families, and we're committing ourselves to corporate worship.
I'm so thankful for our church.
I hear so many pastors.
So you know what?
COVID got us.
They just never came back after COVID.
What?
They never came back after COVID?
Are you for real saying that?
That's all it took to derail the entire mission
A bird flew out of China and everything's over with.
Family worship and corporate worship.
A culture of fellowship and hospitality where people know one another and are inviting one another into their lives.
Training men.
biblical men to be men, training young men to be biblical men, training our young ladies to be biblical women, personal disciple making and passing the gospel down to every generation in nation.
We have a culture of clearly set forth convictions.
We are not in an identity crisis.
We know who we are.
Our convictions include distinctly feminine and masculine roles.
And what this means
If it means nothing else is that we are the kind of people who actually know, ladies and gentlemen, what a woman is.
What a woman is.
And what a man is and how God has created them so beautifully to operate in the distinctive roles and ways that he has created them.
Our convictions include Calvinistic doctrine.
Unapologetically, we believe that God is sovereign over all things and that it is only His unmerited grace that can save any sinner.
You know more can save a soul than you can create a star.
But God and His love through His Son Jesus Christ extends His undeserved kindness every day to every sinner that will repent and believe the gospel.
So God is sovereign and man is responsible, and we serve a big God who saves a depraved man.
And the only explanation is the grace of Jesus Christ that nobody deserves.
We believe in reformed and covenantal worship, that there are biblical reasons for the way that we worship, that as we worship, we walk through the liturgy, we're rehearsing the gospel,
Every single Lord's Day, that scripture's being read, it's being preached.
We're singing and we're doing what we believe the Bible says to do.
We believe in an elder lad and family integrated structure where our children are as much a part of the church as anyone else.
Right here in the heart of it.
So amazing what our children pick up.
We wanna be a church that's culturally engaged
We want to be engaged with what's going on in the culture because the Bible has something to say about many of those things.
And so we want to speak into everything that the Bible speaks into, regardless of whether or not it's politically correct.
So from the very beginning of scripture in Genesis, we see that God gave man a mission to rule and subdue the earth, to take dominion
in our various roles.
And when you put that original mandate together with the great commission that we read from Matthew 28, what you have is a call and a command to display the Lord Jesus Christ over all of life, to use our various vocations and responsibilities in life, our relationships and our resources
to show forth the excellency, the order, the harmony, the creativity, the logic, the beauty, the love, the truth, the usefulness of whatever God has entrusted to our care.
And to show forth his gospel and his grace so that he has proclaimed, so that he has seen and known and loved and honored and obeyed through all of our lives in every dimension of all of creation.
That gives us purpose.
So at the beginning of this year, we laid out as we held him loosely in God's hands, asking for his direction, seven specific target aims that we saw specifically to grow in as a church.
The first one was daily Bible reading and prayer.
We saw as a church to start with the most fundamentals.
Ladies and gentlemen, this is a Bible.
This is a page.
These are the covers and this is a ribbon.
And I have been so encouraged to see so many people in our church talking about, listen to what I was reading just this morning last week.
I listened to what God, everyone's reading in different ways.
Some using plans, some not, but I just hear it all the time.
Listen, here's what God's teaching me.
What does this mean?
There's theological conversations happening all the time.
and I'm so encouraged by you.
And coming prepared every Lord's Day, coming intentionally prepared with your heart, humbled to hear before God, preparing yourself, preparing your family, not to be critics, but to humbly come under the Word of God so that your heart is ready, training our children and our grandchildren in the faith, taking those duties soberly.
Number two, we set out this year
asking God's help to help us to grow in our convictions so that we would walk sweeter in fellowship.
Many of you in our church have only been here for a couple of years, two, three, four years.
We have asked the Lord to help us to develop a healthier infrastructure, a stronger, healthier immune system.
And I'm telling you, it has been so beautiful.
We have faced church discipline issues that just 10 years ago would have sunk us.
And now the body of Christ knows what to do when there's problems.
And the body of Christ knows what not to do.
And there's infrastructure.
As people are growing, they're not wasting their sorrows.
They're leveraging everything that God gave them.
And when sin arises and problems arise, believers are equipped and trained to know what to do, to restore one another.
and to be open to the fact that you too, at times, may need to be restored.
Thirdly, discipling men to lead in the home, the church, and the community.
It's been so incredible to watch our men strengthen in the faith, to learn how to rule their homes, to lead intentionally and strongly, but graciously and sweetly, and their families in the church, to take the helm of responsibility and to take it seriously.
Outside of Sunday morning, the most powerful thing that happens in our church is our men's meeting in the spring of every year.
It's the drive train of everything else.
It has been more influential than I think just about anything we do and shaping the culture of our church.
And I believe God has done a wonderful work.
And I believe that our women rejoice in it.
So many women had told me, especially single women, that they feel safe in this church.
They feel safe.
We have resolved and saw it as well, number four, to grow and develop in our music ministry.
It was only a couple of years ago, such a wonderful foundation was laid.
And since then now we have the piano, which has been beautiful to see Ms. Claudette use her gifts.
We have our children leading before and after the service fully engaged.
We don't have time for a youth group because the children are serving like everyone else.
It has been so incredible to watch our song sings.
How many of you have been a part of our song sings after our lunch fellowship?
I'm telling you, when we finished those math, I feel like I could charge hell with a water gun.
Our hymn sings on Wednesday night, the way the church is more and more learning to sing.
This ought to be the kind of church.
It's been said, where you hear babies crying and men singing.
Men do not sing in most churches in my experience.
And the reason is, in part,
Because men don't want to sing to Jesus like he's their seventh-grade girlfriend.
Men do not want to sing effeminate songs about making out to Jesus which characterizes most of modern Christian music.
What the church has historically sung has been hymns and songs that have both marched men out to war and put babies to sleep.
I believe that this month and next month is a perfect example of what God has been doing in our midst.
This month started in just a few moments.
We'll sing a hymn that's over a thousand years old.
We'll sing a hymn Lord willing that will march us into the next year as we put on the full armor of God.
And we will trust
that our King is the sovereign one of all creation and we are marching out to war and our families, our workplaces and our churches every single day to dispel darkness and shine light as salt and light in the world.
And next month, Lord willing will follow such a high and strong and manly road bust him King Alfred's war song by singing
about the king of love, my shepherd is, Psalm 23.
Because just as we sing to him as the high and holy host of heaven, who slits the throat of his enemies and takes no captives and leads us in a train of victory, we rule with him forever.
At the same time, we'll see next month that he is as sweet as a tender shepherd.
Fighting all wolves and gently leading his children is a father to them.
knowing each one of them by name and knowing every hair on their head.
This is our king.
So we've sang together this year.
We've sang through very difficult losses.
We've sang through very high victories.
And when we come together to sing, we are going to war.
We have asked the Lord to help us to be more engaged and involved in our local community.
Many of you have been involved in serving in such encouraging ways.
There are nursing home ministry, which we've started now.
There are many other community ministries that we've been able to be a part of.
There are digital and print resources.
We have more resources than I can possibly even think about.
And it has nothing to do with me.
It's just a body of Christ that says, I have a gift to do this.
I want to serve.
Number seven, through helping members to manage their time and resources, start businesses, use their gifts, and find their place of service in the church.
Ladies and gentlemen, over the last year by God's grace, will you allow me to boast for a moment?
You say, you're not supposed to boast.
Tell the Apostle Paul that he uses the word boasting more than any other word in 2 Corinthians.
And he's so clear that he doesn't boast in himself or his flesh.
He boasts in the grace of Christ.
We've been able to walk their nine chapters in 2 Corinthians.
Numerous Wednesday night studies that we've learned creeds and confessions.
We publicly read hundreds of chapters of Scripture.
We've prayed diligently.
We've memorized so many passages of Scripture.
We've seen content that's been developed and extended both in personal presence as well as in resources.
We've hosted conferences.
We've targeted very specific targets like the Reformation, Islam, King Alfred the Great, marriage and parenting, kids to love, adoption and orphan care, legacy planning seminar, legal and political and cultural issues.
Our men have been edified by studies together
In the last year, we've learned four Psalms and seven hymns.
We've tackled some very difficult songs and what a joy it has been to learn them.
Songs that put enemies to fly by day and put babies to sleep by night.
The Lord has been kind to add three new families to our church, two by baptism.
There's so many ministries going on in the life of our church from
ministering to young men at the Department of Youth Services every Sunday morning to the work of 1819 news as they labor throughout our state.
The work of kids to love and orphan care, the work of nursing homes and ministering to elders, the work of our missionaries in Peru who are like family to us and are starting churches that are healthy and strong and a blessing
our giving as a church has increased to such a surplus that we didn't even know what to do with it.
So we just started paying off more debt.
We've celebrated seniors graduating and babies born.
We've lamented together the loss of very close loved ones.
We've celebrated engagements.
We've loved members through showers and parties and through all of the tragedies and all of the triumphs.
The song that we have sang all year long is this.
We know that our Redeemer lives, glory, hallelujah.
What comfort this assurance gives, glory, hallelujah.
Shout on, pray on, we're gaining ground.
The dead's alive and the lost is found.
Amen.
All evidences of God's grace,
And if you look at it in the big scheme of things, you may say, it sounds encouraging what God's done, but what is it really?
When we look at what we're up against, when we see the hell and sin that has broke forth in this world and the level of lostness and cultural decay, what is a drop in the bucket?
compared to the needs of this world today.
And I wanna remind you what the prophets reminded Israel when they came out of exile.
Don't despise the day of small beginnings.
So in the coming year, I wanna charge us to continue to grow in our heads, to pursue knowledge of the truth, to read scripture,
to pursue sound doctrine and theology that would keep the core straight, to listen to and love God's word and talk about it together.
Unless we get fat heads thinking we're something that we're not, I wanna charge this too in our hearts.
Listen, the knowledge of Christ in this word should cause our hearts to inflame with love for Jesus Christ.
And if it's not, you're doing all of it wrong.
that God would give us hearts that truly love Him and His glory and His people and the people around us, that we would grow in our hands and feet, that we would be eager to serve, that we would be the first ones that want to go, to fill the need, to see the need, to fill the need, to not have to be told what to do.
God told us to go, so we want to go, we want to serve.
You know, this church,
maybe only about 77 members, but I'm telling you, it feels like a thousand.
Because they say in the average church that 10% of the people do 90% of the word.
Listen, if you're not willing to serve, you gotta go.
We have no room for dead weight, you gotta go.
I am so encouraged by seeing so many evidences of God's grace
where people are serving.
Everyone has different gifts, different opportunities, different seasons of life, different bandwidths.
And I'm telling you, a happy Christian is a service-oriented Christian.
Whether it's speaking, whether it's doing whatever God has gifted and allowed and put you in place to do.
We wanna grow the whole man into the whole Christ.
There's not one particular metric.
We wanna grow up holistically in every way.
Ladies and gentlemen, God has created you with a physical body.
You need to take care of it to the best that you can.
Proper diet and exercise and sleep, you need to honor the best that you can with the body that God's given you.
God has given you a soul.
You need to tend to that soul and you need to tend to the souls of the people around you by nurturing it with the word of God, with prayer, with the ministry of the local church,
God has given us emotions that need to be directed rightly.
God has given us minds to be filled with truth, to be said on that which is good and true and beautiful.
And so we want to grow up in every way, the whole man into the whole Christ.
I want to charge us to continue to grow, not in different goals, but in all of these same goals.
in the coming year.
And who knows what God would do with us in the coming year.
Lord willing, we plan to continue their second Corinthians 10, 13.
If the Lord leaves us, I want to preach through Psalms 136 through 150.
We've went through almost every psalm in the Bible.
I want to preach through Malachi and then Lord willing, I want to give two or three years going verse by verse to the book of Luke.
through the book of Luke.
And whatever God does with that, we'll leave it in his hands.
As we march into a new year, we're marching into war.
It was AD 853.
There was a young boy by the name of Alfred.
He said on his mother's lap,
and he listened to her songs and her stories.
He was the youngest of five sons of King Ethel Wolf of Wessex and the extreme southwestern portion of England.
It was a time of very difficult hardship and turmoil.
The Anglo-Saxon people had been suffering for a very long time from Viking invasions
from the Northeast.
They had been raiding, raping, pillaging, burning, and destroying everything in their path.
There were very few books, ignorance, and superstition won the day.
They had become prosperous.
They had become soft.
They had taken the blessings of God for granted, and they were not faithful.
They did not guard the deposit that God had given to them.
They had no knowledge of God.
God had done great wonders in their midst.
Judges says, and after them arose another generation who neither knew not God nor the works that he had done for Israel.
Alfred said on his mother's lap, and he held a book.
And his mother said that if you had learned to read and write, and you could recite the book back to me, I'll give it to any of my children,
that can learn to do that.
Alfred heard the book so many times, one poem after the other that he finally memorized it.
God began to develop within him early, a love for truth, a love for God.
Alfred was historians characterize him as a delicate health.
Now, I don't know exactly what it means to be a delicate health, but let's just say that's not how I want my son's character asked.
His father and his mother poured all of their affection upon him as their youngest son.
His brothers were jostling to become king, even trying to usurp their father.
Alfred quietly waited and he watched.
He thought that he would give us life.
to scholasticism, to intellectual pursuits, to a life of quiet piety.
He was fifth in the line for secession, so there was no way on God's green earth that this man would ever become king.
But in age 71, at the age of 23 years old, after his siblings had died off
are been denied the throne in one way or another.
Alfred found himself in a position that he would have never in a thousand lifetimes imagined.
He was the king of Wessex, one of individual kings throughout the Anglo-Saxon world.
And as he took that crown upon his head, his father was dead, his mother was dead, and all of his brothers were dead.
And he faced a very formidable challenge.
And literally it felt like the world was on his shoulders.
It was a very dark time.
Wessex was in peril.
The Viking invaders had already taken over East Anglia, Kent and London.
And now they were literally advancing to destroy this kingdom and everyone within it.
One month after his succession to the throne, he defeated the combined forces of two Viking armies.
Over a period of seven years, he fought a heroic war against the Viking invaders.
Alfred was a man of prayer.
He was on his knees before he ever had swords in his hand.
He saw the face of God.
He knew that he could not withdraw away to
monastic quietism and monasteries.
He knew that this war was not political.
It was a battle of a right versus wrong.
And he knew that at the heart of it was the gospel of Jesus Christ.
And at first, all of the invaders had to be held back so that the kingdom could be restored.
There were times when he paid tribute, there were times when he hid, there were times when he even would flee.
But God gifted this man with an unparalleled opportunity to begin to build infrastructure.
He began to build supply lines and roads.
He began to educate the people.
He began to call them on their face before God to repent of their sins and seek the God of heaven.
He began to equip them and teach them how to go to war.
And in May of age 78, at the Battle of Wiltshire, King Alfred the Great received the surrender of Guthrum and his Viking army.
The Viking commander was baptized as hostages were taken and King Alfred put all of those Vikings to flight.
And he turned an entire kingdom to the God of heaven.
said on the life of King Alfred.
Alfred's victory reverberates to this day.
He sparked a literary renaissance.
He structured Britain's roadways.
He revisited the legal codes.
He revived Christian learning and worship.
It was Alfred's accomplishments that laid the groundwork for Britain's later glories and triumphs in literature, liturgy and liberty.
And literally for a thousand years, God used this one unlikely man to save Western civilization.
He ruthlessly
and strategically fought off enemy invaders.
He strategically built infrastructure throughout the kingdom.
He gave an overhaul and restoring Christian education and literature.
He required that all around him would read the Bible and he taught them how to do it.
He restored ancient classic literature.
He used scripture to re-cautify English law, the law that we now enjoy, any trace of truth within a UO to King Alfred.
He restored Christian worship to the heart of the people.
Does that mean that every person was a Christian?
Of course not.
But that means that he set their faces to repent and believe the God of heaven and look to him.
He held high the pillars of worship and education.
And he put scripture in their hands and he called them to worship God.
He trained men for battle.
And he taught them to know and live for God and make a difference in the world.
And Alfred died on October 26, 899 at the age of 50 years old.
Most of the feats of his life he did before his 30th birthday.
The most unlikely candidate
And in all of the annals of British history, of all of the splendid monarchs that have ever reigned in the British Isles, there is one man that history now refers to as the great and only one.
And his name is King Alfred the Great.
He set out in his own words to be great, truly both in warfare and
and wisdom.
And here's a man that just humbly trusted God was willing to be faithful where he was and God used him.
When the enemy comes in, a roaring like a flood coveting the kingdom and a hungering for blood, the Lord will raise a standard up and lead his people on.
The Lord of hosts will go before
defending every foe.
For the Lord is our defense, Yehu, which is Latin, for Jesus defend us.
Some may trust in chariots and some trust in horses, but we will depend on the name of Christ our Lord.
The Lord has made my hands to war and my fingers to fight.
The Lord lays low our enemies and raises us upright.
He raises us upright.
Thousands fall at my left hand, 10,000 to my right, but he will defend us from the arrow in the night.
Protect us from the terrors of the teeth of the devour, imbue us with your spirit, Lord, encompass us with your power.
For the Lord is our defense, Jehu to defend us.
I've went about 15 or 20 minutes over, get over it.
Let's pray.
Father, we pray that you would defend and guide your people, that you would save your enemies, and we long for the day when we are the church triumphant and glory, and we pray that you would help us to be a merry, joyful, holy people on this earth as the church militant, going forward with full trust and faith in Christ.
In Jesus' name we pray, amen.